Extended reality (XR) is an umbrella term to refer to augmented reality (AR), mixed reality (MR), and virtual reality (VR). The technology is intended to combine or mirror the physical world with a "d...

Extended reality (XR) is an umbrella term to refer to augmented reality (AR), mixed reality (MR), and virtual reality (VR). The technology is intended to combine or mirror the physical world with a "digital twin world" able to interact with it, giving users an immersive experience by being in a virtual or augmented environment. 
The fields of virtual reality and augmented reality are rapidly growing and being applied in a wide range of areas such as entertainment, cinema, marketing, real estate, training, education, maintenance and remote work. Extended reality has the ability to be used for joint effort in the workplace, training, educational purposes, therapeutic treatments, and data exploration and analysis.
Extended reality works by using visual data acquisition that is either accessed locally or shared and transfers over a network and to the human senses. By enabling real-time responses in a virtual stimulus these devices create customized experiences. Advancing in 5G and edge computing – a type of computing that is done "at or near the source of data" – could aid in data rates, increase user capacity, and reduce latency. These applications will likely expand extended reality into the future.
Around one-third of the global extended reality market is attributed to Europe.


== See also ==
Computer-mediated reality – Ability to manipulate one's perception of reality through the use of a computer
Head-mounted display – Type of display device
Immersion (virtual reality) – Perception of being physically present in a non-physical world
Metaverse – Collective three-dimensional virtual shared space
On-set virtual production – Technology for television and film production
OpenXR – Standard for access to virtual reality and augmented reality platforms and devices
Reality–virtuality continuum – Concept in computer science
Smartglasses – Wearable computer glasses
Spatial computing – Computing paradigm emphasizing 3D spatial interaction with technology
Wearable computer – Small computing device worn on the body
WebXR – Experimental JavaScript API for augmented/virtual reality devices


== References ==


== Sources ==
Vinod Baya; Erik Sherman. "The road ahead for augmented reality". pwc.
Pereira, Fernando. "Deep Learning-Based Extended Reality: Making Humans and Machines Speak the Same Visual Language." In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Interactive eXtended Reality, 1–2. IXR ’22. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2022. https://doi.org/10.1145/3552483.3555366.
United States Government Accountability Office. Extended Reality Technologies. Science & Tech Spotlight. Washington, D.C: GAO, Science, Technology Assessment, and Analytics, 2022.
Boel, Carl, Kim Dekeyser, Fien Depaepe, Luis Quintero, Tom van Daele, and Brenda Wiederhold. Extended Reality: Opportunities, Success Stories and Challenges (Health, Education) : Executive Summary. Luxembourg: Publications Office, 2023. https://op.europa.eu/publication/manifestation_identifier/PUB_KK0722997ENN.
Sayler, Kelley M. "Military Applications of Extended Reality." IF 12010. Washington, D.C: Congressional Research Service, 2022.