The Wild Robot is a 2024 American animated science fiction film produced by DreamWorks Animation and distributed by Universal Pictures. Based on the 2016 novel of the same name by Peter Brown, it was ...

The Wild Robot is a 2024 American animated science fiction film produced by DreamWorks Animation and distributed by Universal Pictures. Based on the 2016 novel of the same name by Peter Brown, it was written for the screen and directed by Chris Sanders and features the voices of Lupita Nyong'o, Pedro Pascal, Kit Connor, Bill Nighy, Stephanie Hsu, Mark Hamill, Catherine O'Hara, Matt Berry, and Ving Rhames. The film follows Roz (Nyong'o), a service robot shipwrecked on an uninhabited island who must adapt to her surroundings, build relationships with the local wildlife, and become the adoptive mother of an orphaned goose, Brightbill (Connor).
Sanders first encountered the original book through his daughter and was offered an opportunity to direct a film adaptation at DreamWorks. The film's visuals use a watercolor aesthetic, inspired by classic Disney animated films and the works of Hayao Miyazaki. It was the final film to be animated entirely in-house at DreamWorks, as the studio will begin relying heavily on outside vendors for future films. Kris Bowers composed the score, marking his first score for a fully animated film.
The Wild Robot premiered at the 49th Toronto International Film Festival on September 8, 2024, and was released in the United States on September 27. The film was a critical and commercial success, grossing $324.8 million worldwide on a production budget of $78 million and becoming the sixth-highest grossing animated film of 2024. It was nominated for Best Animated Feature Film at the 82nd Golden Globe Awards and 78th British Academy Film Awards, among others. A sequel is in development.


== Plot ==
A storm causes a Universal Dynamics cargo ship to lose ROZZUM robots, which wash up on an uninhabited island. Only ROZZUM Unit 7134, nicknamed "Roz", survives and is accidentally activated by wildlife. Roz frightens the animals and injures herself while trying to help them, even after learning their language. Unable to find anyone needing her services, Roz signals for retrieval, but is struck by lightning and attacked by animals: While fleeing an aggressive grizzly bear, she accidentally crushes a goose nest, leaving one egg.
After Roz protects the egg from a hungry fox named Fink, a gosling hatches from it; he imprints on her and breaks her long-range transponder. Following advice from Pinktail, an opossum with several children, Roz cares for the gosling to ensure he can fly before the winter migration, naming him Brightbill, and Fink helps Roz build a shelter and they cohabit. As Brightbill grows, he learns to swim but is mocked by other geese. When Brightbill discovers Roz killed his family, he has a falling out with her and angrily disowns her and storms off.
Roz reconstructs one ROZZUM unit, who advises her to return to the Universal Dynamics factory, but Roz decides instead to finish helping Brightbill learn to fly, enlisting the help of a falcon named Thunderbolt and receiving advice from Longneck, the goose flock's leader, allowing Brightbill to master flying just in time to join the geese's migration. Roz, missing Brightbill and unsure of her continued purpose, reactivates her transponder but shuts it off immediately after Universal Dynamics detects her signal.
During the migration, a thunderstorm forces the geese to shelter inside a Universal Dynamics greenhouse, triggering a contamination alert that sets RECO robots after them. Longneck sacrifices himself so Brightbill can lead the flock to safety. Meanwhile, Roz and Fink save animals during a severe snowstorm, urging them to a truce before Roz powers down. Spring arrives, and Roz reawakens to find the animals still following the peace and Brightbill returning, hailed as a hero.
Shortly after, a Universal Dynamics retrieval robot, Vontra, arrives to recover Roz. Roz flees with Fink, pursued by RECOs dispatched by Vontra. The animals band together to fight off the RECOs, but Vontra captures Roz and starts a forest fire by detonating the damaged RECOs. Brightbill attacks the Universal Dynamics dropship to save Roz as Fink and the others put out the fire. Despite Roz appearing to have been shut down by Vontra, her love for Brightbill restores her systems. Roz and Brightbill destroy Vontra and escape as the dropship explodes.
Roz decides to return to Universal Dynamics to protect the island from future attacks, but promises to return. Months later, Roz works at another Universal Dynamics greenhouse, maintaining her memories. Brightbill visits her and the two embrace.


== Voice cast ==

Lupita Nyong'o as:
ROZZUM unit 7134 ("Roz"), an abandoned robot from the tech company Universal Dynamics that was washed onto a forest in Oregon and learns to adapt to the new environment. The name of her product line, ROZZUM, and her manufacturer are references to Rossum's Universal Robots, the play that created the term "robot".
ROZZUM unit 6262 ("Rummage"), a broken robot that was washed onto the same island as Roz, who gives Roz her transponder to return home.
Pedro Pascal as Fink, a sly but well-meaning red fox who is the first animal that Roz befriends. 
Kit Connor as Brightbill, an orphaned runt Canada goose who is raised by Roz as her own son after losing his biological family.
Boone Storme as Baby Brightbill.
Catherine O'Hara as Pinktail, a maternal Virginia opossum who gives Roz some advice on raising Brightbill.
Bill Nighy as Longneck, an elderly barnacle goose who helps Roz understand teaching Brightbill how to fly.
Stephanie Hsu as Vontra (Virtual Observational Neutralizing Troublesome Retrieval Authority), a callous, tentacled robot sent by Universal Dynamics to retrieve Roz.
Mark Hamill as Thorn, a grizzly bear and the island's most feared predator.
Matt Berry as Paddler, a neurotic beaver who spends his days trying to gnaw down a giant tree.
Ving Rhames as Thunderbolt, a peregrine falcon who helps Brightbill learn to fly.
Randy Thom as the RECOs, reconnaissance robots designed by Universal Dynamics to serve Vontra.


== Production ==


=== Development ===

On September 28, 2023, DreamWorks Animation announced an animated film adaptation of the book series The Wild Robot by Peter Brown, with Chris Sanders set to write and direct, Jeff Hermann set to produce, and Sanders' longtime creative collaborator Dean DeBlois set to serve as executive producer. Other crew members were announced, including production designer Raymond Zibach, editor Mary Blee, and head of story Heidi Jo Gilbert. 
Sanders first encountered Brown's book through his daughter, though he never read it himself. Years later, while looking for his next project at DreamWorks, Sanders was offered an opportunity to direct an adaptation of the book for the studio. Upon reading it, Sanders immediately fell in love with the story and felt he was the right person to adapt it to film. He described the book as "deceptively simple" and "emotionally complex". Sanders had previously considered the idea of a creature bonding with animals in a forest for his directorial debut Lilo & Stitch (2002).  Sanders contacted Brown and would later describe the phone call as critical to the film's development. Brown told the production team that his intended theme for the book was that kindness could be a survival skill. Sanders sought to weave that theme through the film and felt he achieved that goal. Another theme in the story that Sanders was drawn to was that of motherhood. He felt he had never done a story of this nature before.

Changes were made to the book's story for the film. In the book, Roz is in constant search of a task but also in the wrong place and with no one to give her tasks. Sanders felt that she risked becoming monotonous at points in the story, so he strived to make Roz constantly interesting and compelling throughout. Some character roles from the book were reduced in order to give others more substantial screen time and impact. The changes to the characters and their roles were also made to prevent the film from becoming too crowded.


=== Casting ===
Cast members Lupita Nyong'o, Pedro Pascal, Catherine O'Hara, Bill Nighy, Kit Connor, Mark Hamill, Matt Berry and Ving Rhames were revealed on March 5, 2024, with the release of the film's first trailer.
Sanders wanted Roz to be a compelling character and felt an extraordinary voice performance was necessary to achieve this. He wanted to avoid a two-dimensional fictional take on a robot, where they go straight from being emotionless to emotional. Nyong'o was tasked with finding a voice for the character and evolving it as the story progressed. The actress's role was particularly important as Roz did not possess facial articulation. This meant Nyong'o's voice was the main way of signifying Roz's emotions. 
According to Hamill, who voiced Thorn, he learned about the film after reading the book The Wild Robot. Hamill says that The Wild Robot reminded him of his first feelings about Star Wars (1977), in which he originated the role of Luke Skywalker.


=== Animation and design ===
The Wild Robot would be the final film to be animated entirely in-house at DreamWorks, as Cartoon Brew reported on October 6, 2023, that the studio would be shifting away from producing films in-house in their Glendale campus to relying more heavily on outside studios after 2024. Additional character rigging was done by French studio Stim Studio.
After reading the book, Sanders felt the story's innocent tone and natural setting required a look that strayed away from the standard CGI photorealism in many modern animated films. He and production designer Raymond Zibach wanted the film in its finished state to still resemble the concept paintings. To achieve this, the production team built upon the technologies used in two of DreamWorks' earlier films, Puss in Boots: The Last Wish and The Bad Guys (both 2022). While the characters were made up of CGI geometrical shapes, their surfaces possess a hand-painted look. This painterly style philosophy was carried onto every visual element in the film, including the sky and environments.
Sanders took inspiration from classic Disney animated movies and the works of Hayao Miyazaki, resulting in a stylized CG visual style that he described as "a Monet painting in a Miyazaki forest". He considered Bambi (1942) and My Neighbour Totoro (1988) as the biggest influences on the visuals. The works of Syd Mead served as inspiration for the futuristic parts of the film.
Sanders wanted Roz's design to be iconic and memorable and one that would take its place among fiction's most famous robots. Taking inspiration from C-3PO and R2-D2 from Star Wars and Robby the Robot from Forbidden Planet (1956), he wanted Roz to have little facial articulation. Sanders and the rest of the design team made several prototype designs during production. One of the designers, Hyun Huh presented his Roz design to the crew, which became the basis for the one seen in the film. The crew immediately fell in love with Huh's design, with Sanders describing it as simple and appealing. Brown's original book described Roz with great detail, so Sanders and the team knew they had to leave some design elements out. Although on behalf of Brown's description of what a ROZZUM unit's purpose was to humans, they aimed for Roz's design to be humanoid.


=== Music ===

In March 2024, Kris Bowers was revealed to be composing the score, his first score for a fully animated film. Additionally, two original songs were announced to be made for the film, performed and co-written by Maren Morris. The first, "Kiss the Sky", was released on August 28; the second, "Even When I'm Not", along with the full soundtrack album, was released on September 27. Morris and her team of co-writers were inspired to write a second song for the film, "Even When I'm Not", which is featured in the film's end credits, when they screened the finished film.


== Release ==
The Wild Robot had its world premiere as the opening front runner of the Toronto International Film Festival Grand Opening celebration on September 8, 2024. It was released in theaters in the United States on September 27, 2024, and in the United Kingdom on October 18. The film was originally scheduled for September 20, 2024, but was pushed back a week to avoid competition with Transformers One.
On December 29, 2024, it was announced that The Wild Robot would be re-released in theaters in the United States on January 17, 2025.


=== Marketing ===
The first trailer for the film, featuring a rendition of Louis Armstrong's "What a Wonderful World", plus a poster, were released on March 5, 2024. The trailer debuted in theaters three days later in front of screenings of DreamWorks' other new film Kung Fu Panda 4. Writing for Polygon, Tasha Robinson compared the design of Roz to familiar film robots such as BB-8 (the Star Wars sequel trilogy), WALL-E (in his titular film), Baymax (from Big Hero 6), and The Iron Giant (in his titular film), and noted that the only words spoken in the trailer - "Sometimes, to survive, we must become more than we were programmed to be" - evoked the message of The Iron Giant (1999).


=== Home media ===
The Wild Robot was released to rent on digital streaming on October 15, 2024, and on Blu-ray and DVD on December 3.
The film will be made available to stream on NBCUniversal's Peacock streaming service in the US on January 24, 2025. As part of Universal's long-term deal with Netflix, the film will stream on Peacock for the first four months of the pay-TV window, before moving to Netflix for the next ten, and returning to Peacock for the remaining four.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
As of January 20, 2025, The Wild Robot has grossed $143.7 million in the United States and Canada, and $181.1 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $324.8 million.
In the United States and Canada, The Wild Robot was released alongside Megalopolis, and was projected to gross $24–30 million from 3,962 theaters in its opening weekend. The film made $11.2 million on its first day, including an estimated $1.9 million from Thursday previews. The film went on to debut to $35.8 million, slightly above predictions and topping the box office. In its second weekend, the film made $18.9 million (a drop of 47% from its first weekend), finishing in second behind newcomer Joker: Folie à Deux. In its third weekend the film made $14 million (dropping just 25.9%), finishing in second behind newcomer Terrifier 3. According to The Hollywood Reporter, theater chains treated the unrated Terrifier 3 as an R-rated film, turning down attendees 17 or younger if unaccompanied by a parent or guardian. Distribution sources speculated that more people saw the film than reported, theorizing that a "noticeable bump" in the earnings for The Wild Robot's third weekend was the result of teenagers buying tickets to the film and then sneaking into screenings of Terrifier 3. The film then made $10.1 million and $6.8 million in its fourth and fifth weekends, respectively.


=== Critical response ===
The Wild Robot received positive reviews. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 97% of 241 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.4/10. The website's consensus reads: "A simple tale told with great sophistication, The Wild Robot is wondrous entertainment that dazzles the eye while filling your heart to the brim." It is DreamWorks Animation's second highest-rated film on the site, behind Sanders' How to Train Your Dragon (2010). Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 85 out of 100, based on 46 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, while those surveyed by PostTrak gave it a 96% overall positive score, with 62% saying they would definitely recommend it.
Natalia Winkelman of The New York Times called the film "a dazzling triumph of animation" and wrote "this is a work that cares most about two things: big feelings and great beauty." Pete Hammond of Deadline Hollywood said, "If Spielberg's E.T. had been an animated film instead, it might resemble what writer-director Chris Sanders has created here. However, Wild Robot weaves its own magic and for that we can all cry tears of joy." Adrian Horton, writing for The Guardian said: "Clever, heartfelt and frequently stunning, The Wild Robot offers the type of all-ages-welcome animated entertainment that will delight kids and leave a lump in one's throat." Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph gave the film a five out of five scoring, saying, "DreamWorks was founded 30 years ago this month, and this well-timed anniversary release is their richest, most moving film since 1998's reputation-making The Prince of Egypt." In his review for Vulture, Bilge Ebiri praised Nyong'o's performance and found that it "turn[ed] this heartwarming family film into an unforgettable one."
Collider thought it was one of Sanders' best films yet, while Screen Rant called it the best animated film of the year.


=== Accolades ===


== Environmental themes ==
The Wild Robot incorporates environmental themes throughout its narrative, including a reference to climate change in a sequence depicting a futuristic San Francisco with a partially submerged Golden Gate Bridge. DreamWorks Animation developed the film in collaboration with both Universal's GreenerLight Program and the Natural Resources Defense Council's Rewrite the Future initiative, with environmental experts consulting on the ecological elements and a sustainability-focused PSA featuring Lupita Nyong'o. The film's environmental themes were showcased at Climate Week NYC 2024, where it received a special screening at the inaugural Climate Film Festival.


== Sequel ==
On September 7, 2024, when asked about a potential sequel, Sanders stated, "I would very much like to. This was a labor of love on the part of everybody at the studio, and yes, I think I'd love to go and stay here for a while." On October 12, 2024, he confirmed that a sequel is in development.


== See also ==
Robot Dreams, a 2023 animated feature adaptation of another graphic novel also featuring robots and animals


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
The Wild Robot at IMDb
Official screenplay
A video on the film's unique animation style on YouTube